Breaking change doc: Nullable.GetUnderlyingType throws for custom Type subclasses (.NET 11) (#53409)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/compatibility/core-libraries/11/nullable-getunderlyingtype-throws.md

---
title: "Breaking change: Nullable.GetUnderlyingType throws for custom Type subclasses"
description: "Learn about the breaking change in .NET 11 where Nullable.GetUnderlyingType throws NotSupportedException for custom Type subclasses that don't override Type.GetNullableUnderlyingType."
ms.date: 04/29/2026
ai-usage: ai-assisted
---

# Nullable.GetUnderlyingType throws for custom Type subclasses

> <xref:System.Nullable.GetUnderlyingType(System.Type)?displayProperty=nameWithType> now forwards to the new virtual method <xref:System.Type.GetNullableUnderlyingType>. Custom <xref:System.Type> subclasses that don't override this new virtual throw <xref:System.NotSupportedException> instead of returning `null`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<xref:System.Nullable.GetUnderlyingType(System.Type)?displayProperty=nameWithType> now forwards to the new virtual method `System.Type.GetNullableUnderlyingType()`. Custom <xref:System.Type> subclasses that don't override this new virtual throw <xref:System.NotSupportedException> instead of returning `null`.
```

## Version introduced

> .NET 11 Preview 3

Reviewer 2: Preview 3 is out. This should be Preview 4 or Preview 5 depending on when the PR gets merged.

> .NET 11 Preview 3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.NET 11 Preview 4
```

## Previous behavior

> Previously, `Nullable.GetUnderlyingType` used `IsGenericType` and `GetGenericTypeDefinition` directly. Custom `Type` subclasses that did not specialize nullable handling silently returned `null`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, `Nullable.GetUnderlyingType` only recognized the `Nullable<T>` provided by the currently executing runtime. It returned `null` for any custom `Type` subclasses.
```
It is not relevant that the implementation used `IsGenericType` and `GetGenericTypeDefinition`

```csharp
class MyType : Type { /* ... */ }

Type t = new MyType();
Type? u = Nullable.GetUnderlyingType(t); // returned null
```

## New behavior

Starting in .NET 11, `Nullable.GetUnderlyingType` calls the new virtual `Type.GetNullableUnderlyingType`. The base implementation on `System.Type` throws <xref:System.NotSupportedException>, so custom `Type` subclasses that don't override the virtual throw:

```csharp
class MyType : Type { /* does not override GetNullableUnderlyingType */ }

Type t = new MyType();
Type? u = Nullable.GetUnderlyingType(t);
// throws System.NotSupportedException:
//   "Derived classes must provide an implementation."
```

> The in-box `Type` subclasses that .NET ships (`RuntimeType`, `TypeDelegator`, `TypeBuilder`, `EnumBuilder`, `GenericTypeParameterBuilder`, `TypeBuilderInstantiation`, `SymbolType`, `ModifiedType`, the `SignatureType` family, and the `MetadataLoadContext` types) all override the new virtual and are unaffected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Type` subclasses shipped with .NET (runtime `Type` implementation, `TypeDelegator`, `TypeBuilder`, `EnumBuilder`, `GenericTypeParameterBuilder`, `TypeBuilderInstantiation`, `SymbolType`, `ModifiedType`, the `SignatureType` family, and the `MetadataLoadContext` types) all override the new virtual and are unaffected.
```
MetadataLoadContext is not "in-box". Also, "in-box" is not a customer facing term.

## Recommended action

If you author a custom `Type` subclass, add an override of `GetNullableUnderlyingType`. Choose the appropriate implementation:

- If your subclass never represents a `Nullable<T>`, return `null`:

  ```csharp
  public override Type? GetNullableUnderlyingType() => null;
  ```

- If your subclass represents constructed generic types and might instantiate `Nullable<T>`, return the corresponding type argument:

  ```csharp
  public override Type? GetNullableUnderlyingType()
  {
      if (IsGenericType
          && !IsGenericTypeDefinition
          && GetGenericTypeDefinition() == typeof(Nullable<>))
      {
          return GetGenericArguments()[0];
      }
      return null;
  }
  ```

- If your subclass is a delegating wrapper around another `Type`, forward the call:

  ```csharp
  public override Type? GetNullableUnderlyingType() => _innerType.GetNullableUnderlyingType();
  ```

Compiling against .NET 11 surfaces the new virtual on `Type`, making the override discoverable in your IDE. No app or configuration switch reverts to the old behavior.

## Affected APIs

- <xref:System.Nullable.GetUnderlyingType(System.Type)?displayProperty=fullName>

> - <xref:System.Type.GetNullableUnderlyingType?displayProperty=fullName> (new virtual; default throws <xref:System.NotSupportedException>)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `System.Type.GetNullableUnderlyingType()` (new virtual; default throws <xref:System.NotSupportedException>)
```
